The current Belizean culture that’s prevailing in the country borrows lots of influences from the British, who were the first settlers, the Spanish mestizos, who came in as refugees in the mid-1800s, the African slaves, who worked in the flourishing timber industry and the natives who also have an established culture that dates back from the Maya civilization. Perhaps the greatest impact of British influences is on the politics of the country and the assimilation of the English language that has one way or another contribute to the overall identity of Belize as a nation. The government of Belize is patterned after the British Parliament. The English language which is currently the official language can be spoken fluently by 54% of Belizeans in a fluent manner with 26% can speak and understand little English. In fact, the second largest spoken mother tongue, the Kriol, was also derived from English.

The Spanish mestizo refugees brought along with them Roman Catholicism. The religion that is now the dominant religion in Belize would definitely impress upon the country the rituals and traditions Catholics observe. Not only religion, the Spanish mestizos has also given Belizeans of today the gift of another tongue which has also become the largest spoken mother tongue. Being a Central American and Caribbean country, it is important also that Belize could deal with their Spanish-speaking neighbors for trade and diplomacy.

The African slaves who were brought in to work the lumberyards back then also had a culture of their own which gives the Belizean culture a bit of an African flavor to it. In Belize, there is term people call “obeah” which refers to folk magic. Obeah however is not entirely African as the native people prior to the settling of the Europeans had their own rituals as well. Over the years, the African and native culture with regards to approach to the supernatural has evolved and meld into one system of belief.  A lot of Belizeans when engaged in idle talk, the usual topic would be about obeah and the people who are practicing obeah. Obeah mostly would refer to the art of foretelling the future and the making of magic charms and talismans.

Although a lot of Belizean cultures are borrowed from other cultures, the amalgamation of these different cultures has evolved into its own, giving people of Belize their own cultural identity.
