Officially the Republic of Cameroon, Cameroon is a country in Central Africa. Its bordered by the Chad to the northeast; Central African Republic to the east; Nigeria to the north and west; and Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and the Republic of the Congo to the south. Cameroon's coastline sits on the Bight of Biafra (part of the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic Ocean) and sometimes the country is identified as West African and other times as Central African because its strategic position at the crossroads between the two.

Overview of the Government in Cameroon
The Republic of Cameroon is a decentralized unitary state. It is ruled by an authoritarian regime, which means it is ruled by a strong central power and has limited political freedoms. Individual freedoms are subservient to the state and there are no constitutional accountabilities and rules of law under an authoritarian regime. The Republic of Cameroon’s 1972 constitution was modified by 1996 reforms and it provides for a strong centralised power dominated by the executive, the executive power is represented by the President and the Government. The government is made up of the Prime Minister and a Council of Ministers. Cameroon’s Prime Minister is appointed by the President and the Council of Ministers consists of ministers also appointed by the President.

As well as being empowered to name and dismiss cabinet members, the President of the Republic appoints judges, generals, regional governors, prefects, sub-prefects, and heads of Cameroon's state-controlled firms. The President also has the power to approve or veto regulations, obligate or disburse expenditures, declare states of emergency and appropriate and spend profits of state-controlled firms. The president does not need to consult the National Assembly. In 2008, an amendment to the constitution was passed that abolished term limits for the president.

The judiciary is a subsidiary to the executive branch's Ministry of Justice. The Supreme Court can review the constitutional viability of a law at the President's request.

All local government officials are employed by Cameroon’s Ministry of Territorial Administration, this executive department is also where local governments also get most of their budgets.

Whilst the president, the Minister of Justice and the Supreme Court top the judicial hierarchy, traditional rulers, courts and councils also perform functions of government. Traditional courts play a key role in domestic, property and probate law. Tribal laws and customs are honoured in the formal court system as long as it is not in conflict with national law. Traditional rulers receive payments from the national government.

Legislative power in Cameroon rests with the Parliament. Parliament consists of The National Assembly (lower house) and The Senate (upper house). The 180-member National Assembly meets in regular session three times a year. Laws are passed by majority vote of the members present or, if the president mandates a second reading, of the total membership.

Following government pledges to reform the 1972 constitution, the National Assembly implemented a number of amendments in December 1995 which were publicised in January 1996. These amendments called for the formation of a 100-member senate as part of a two-tier legislature, the establishment of regional councils and the fixing of the presidential term to seven years, renewable only once. The government created the Senate in 2013.

Parliament has legislative power however; Parliament may authorise the President of the Republic to legislate by way of a decree for a limited amount of time and for specific purposes. Such decrees are scheduled before the bureau of the National Assembly and the Senate for purposes of approval within the time-limit laid down by enabling law.

Political Background of Cameroon
Paul Biya, President of Cameroon
Cameroon’s government implemented legislation in 1990 to authorize the creation of multiple political parties and alleviate restrictions on establishing civil associations and private newspapers. The country's first multiparty legislative and presidential elections were held in 1992, municipal elections then took place in 1996 and another round of presidential and legislative elections occurred in 1997.

Cameroon is a one-party dominant state with the People's Democratic Movement in power. Opposition parties are allowed, however they are widely considered to have no real chance of gaining power. The three biggest opposition parties boycotted the 1997 presidential election because the government had refused to contemplate opposition requests for an independent election commission.

Cameroon has several independent newspapers. Censorship was ended in 1996, however, the government still occasionally seizes or postpones newspapers and even arrests journalists. A 1990 law sanctioned private radio and television stations but the government is not in a hurry to granted licenses.

The human rights record of Cameroon’s government has improved over the years but remains flawed. Reports of abuses continue to be made, including the beating of detainees, arbitrary arrests and illegal searches. The judiciary is frequently inefficient, corrupt and subject to political influence.

It is worth mentioning that Cameroon is the only country in which two Constitutions are exist side-by-side. For instance, the 1972 Constitution nominates the Prime Minister as constitutional successor of the Head of State in case of death, incapacity, resignation or an extraordinary absence of the incumbent. In contrary, the 1996 Constitutional Reform nominates the President of the Senate as constitutional successor; but until 2013 the Senate did not exist. Very few amendments of the 1996 Constitutional Reform have been applied.

Government Departments in Cameroon
Cameroon’s government consists of the following departments: Ministry of Social Affairs; Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development; Ministry of Commerce; Ministry of Communication; Ministry of Culture; Ministry of Defence; Ministry under the Presidency of the Republic; Ministry of Urban development and Housing; Ministry of Economy and Finance; Ministry of Basic Education; Ministry of Livestock Fisheries and Animal Industries; Ministry of Employment & Vocational Training; Ministry of Energy & Water Resources; Ministry of Secondary Education; Ministry of Secondary and Superior Education; Ministry of Environment & Nature Protection in Cameroon; Ministry of the Public Service and Administrative Reforms; Ministry of Forestry & Wildlife; Ministry of Industry, Mines & Technological Development; Ministry of planning, Programming and Regional Development; Ministry of Small & Medium Size Enterprises, Social Economy & Handicraft; Ministry of Posts & Telecommunications; Ministry of Women Empowerment and the Family; Ministry of Scientific Research & Innovation; Minister of External Relations; Ministry of Public Health; Ministry of Sports and Physical Education; Ministry of Tourism; Ministry of Transport; Ministry of Labour & Social Security; Ministry of Public Works; Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization.

Regional Government in Cameroon
Yaounde, capitol city of Cameroon, Source
Initially, the Republic of Cameroon was divided into provinces. The label "regions" came with the amendment to the Constitution in 1996. The regions are the main sectors in Cameroon. The ten regions of Cameroon are: Adamawa, Centre, East, Far North, North-West, West, South, South-West Littoral and North.

A region is under the authority of a Governor who is appointed by Presidential Decree, this means that the governor embodies the authority of the President and indirectly upholds the authority of the State in the region that they are appointed. Each Government Minister assigns a provincial delegate to each region, the delegate is in charge of implementing policy in his region. With the collaboration of regional delegates, the governor performs the general administration and co-ordination of the work of the civil service in the region, with the exception of the Minister for Justice. The country is divided into regions, the regions are subdivided into departments.

Cameroon has 58 departments. Using the French model, the capital of a department is called the "prefecture". A department is under the authority of a Prefect, who is appointed by Presidential decree, in the same way as a Regional Governor. Again, each Ministerial department appoints to a delegate to each department. Departments are subdivided in "arrondissements" (French for district). Just like departments, the capital of an arrondissement is a sub prefecture and an arrondissement is under the authority of a sub-prefect who upholds the authority of the state in the arrondissement.

Foreign Relations in Cameroon
Cameroon supports the principles of not interfering in the concerns of third world countries and intensified assistance to underdeveloped countries. Cameroon is an active contributor to the United Nations, where its voting record shows its commitment to causes such as environmental protection, international peacekeeping, the rule of law and Third World economic development. Cameroon enjoys good relations with America and other developed countries and it enjoys generally good relations with its African neighbours. Cameroon also supports UN peacekeeping activities in Central Africa.

