Cameroon officially referred to as the Republic of Cameroon, is a nation in West Africa. Nigeria borders it to the west, the Central African Republic to the east, Chad to the northeast, and the Republic of the Congo and Equatorial Guinea to the south. The country’s coastline lies on a section of the Atlantic Ocean, the Gulf of Guinea, and on the Bight of Biafra.

Religious beliefs in Cameroon
In Cameroon, there is a lot of religious diversity and freedom. The most common religious belief is Christianity and it is adhered to by approximately two-thirds of the country’s population. Muslim, on the other hand, is a minority religious belief and is practiced by roughly one-fifth of the population. A few others practice African Folk Religion and other religions and some claim not to have any religious belief. Some of these religious beliefs will be discussed in brief below.

Christianity in Cameroon
100 Years of Faith, Christian church in Kumbo, SourceLike in many other African nations, Christianity in Cameroon was developed and established by Christian missionaries. The missionaries came to the country in the 19th century and they founded mission schools and health facilities to benefit the indigenous people. All Christians, both Roman Catholics, Protestants, or any other Christian religious group make up about 70% of the country’s population. The majority of the Christians are mostly concentrated in the western and southern regions of the country, but they can also be found all over the country just like the Muslims. People from the southwest and northwest provinces, formerly a section of British Cameroons, are mostly Protestants. The French-speaking territories of the western and southern regions are predominantly Catholic.

Roman Catholicism in Cameroon
The first Catholic priests arrived in Cameroon in 1890 and were able to acquire a large following between then and the 1930s. Currently, 39.2% of the population adheres to the Roman Catholic Church. This makes it the biggest Christian group in the country. Masses are not carried out in Latin but rather in the local languages. This is a practice that started quite early when the church was being established. At that time, church leaders and priests were elected from the indigenous population. The Catholic Church in Cameroon has built facilities such as schools, churches, and hospitals and they all serve the public.

Protestantism in Cameroon
Mosque in N'Gaoundere, Bamkin, SourceProtestant believers make up the second biggest Christian group in the country. They make up about 28.1% of the population. The first missionaries to arrive in the 19th century built the very first Protestant churches in Cameroon. The first Protestant group to be established was the Baptist Mission Society. Other countries soon afterwards began sending their mission teams and this led to the development of many other Protestant Churches and the development of associated health facilities and schools.

Some of the Protestant religious beliefs in Cameroon are the Anglican Church, Presbyterian, the Lutheran Church, and the Seventh-Day Adventists. The majority of the Christian churches were developed to help spread literacy and translation of the Bible. This made both the scripture and education accessible in indigenous languages and in the health care as well.

There are other Christian congregations that are not Catholic or Protestant, for instance, the Jehovah’s Witnesses among others. These groups make up about 2.3% of the country’s population.

Islam in Cameroon
Islam is the second most adhered to religion in the country after Christianity. Approximately 19.5% of Cameroon’s population is Islam. This religious belief was first introduced into the country by the Fulani community during their migration from Mali and Nigeria. The Fulani forced the indigenous people to convert to Islam. This eventually led to lots of conflicts with the natives. The Muslims came up with their groups referred to as lamidats and they were governed by a powerful leader known as lamido. Currently, Muslims in Cameroon belong to the Qadriya brotherhood.

The Muslims in the country are divided into Sufi, Shia, Sunni, and non-denominational Muslims. Sufi Islam is a mystical trend in Islam with specific institutions, dogmas, values, and ritual practices that began quite early in the Islamic history and is a representation of the manifestation of mystical practices in the Islam religion.  Shia Islam believes that Prophet Muhammad appointed Ali ibn Abi Talib as the Imam. This Islamic school is also founded on the Quran and Muhammad’s messages manifested in hadith, and on hadiths taught by the Imams. Sunni Islam makes up the largest population of Muslims in the country. Non-denominational Muslims, on the other hand, do not belong to any particular Islamic denomination.

The majority of the Muslim population can be found in the northern region of the country. Quranic schools have also been constructed across the country.

African Folk Religion
Besides most of the people in Cameroon converting to Christianity and Islam, a few others, especially in the rural areas, have maintained their aboriginal religious practices. This group makes up approximately 4.3% of the country’s population. A few of these traditional religious beliefs have borrowed a few Christian and Islam practices and combined them with their own practices. Some of the traditional religious practices are animal sacrifices, worshiping of spirits and ancestors, and rituals.

Other religious beliefs in Cameroon
Besides the religions mentioned above, there are other minority religions practiced in the country. Some of this include Hinduism, which is practiced by 2.1% of the population most of whom are Asian emigrants. Another religion is Judaism. This is practiced by a small number of Jews in the country who have created links with the broader Jewish international community. A small community of about 50 people practice Judaism. Another small population adhere to the Bahá'í Faith. Others claim to be atheists or agnostics and they make up 4.6% of the total population. The locals also believe in witchcraft. The practice of witchcraft has, however, been banned by the government and anyone suspected of being a witch is normally subjected to mob violence.

It is important to note that Cameroon’s constitution allows for freedom of religion. The government also respects this right in practice. Cameroon also holds a high degree of religious tolerance.