According to the United Nations (UN), the Comoros is among the fifty least developed nations in the globe. It is also estimated that about 50% of the citizens live below the poverty line. The gross domestic product is way below the countrywide rate of population growth. This, therefore, means that the definite GDP per capita is negative and declining. The majority of the population depends on the assistance from Comorian diaspora, mostly in Mayotte and France.

The Union of Comoros consists of three islands, with inadequate transportation links, a few natural resources, and a young steadily growing population. The low level in education of the labor force has contributed greatly to high unemployment, subsistence level of economic activity, and dependency on technical assistance and foreign grants. The estimated gross domestic product (GDP) of the country if roughly $700 per capita income, making Comoros the globe’s least developed and poorest country. Most of the locals make their living from fishing and subsistence farming and the minimum wages range from $3-$4 per day.

Agriculture, including forestry, hunting, and fishing is the leading sector of the country’s economy. It contributes about 40% to the GDP, provides most of the country’s exports, and employs 80% of the total labor force. Rice is the country’s main staple food and it accounts for a huge part of the imports.

To improve the economy, the government is working to privatize industrial and commercial enterprises, to upgrade education and technical training, to improve health services, to promote tourism, to diversify exports, and to reduce the high population growth rate. The country still relies on foreign support which is vital if the country wishes to see growth in the annual GDP.

Some of the sectors of the country’s economy will be discussed in brief below.

Agriculture sector in Comoros
Bread for sale in Moroni, SourceAs mentioned earlier, agriculture makes up 40% of the country’s GDP and involves about 80% of the population. There are two main agricultural zones. The first is the coastal area which supports cash crops such as cloves, ylang-ylang, and vanilla. The other is the highlands which supports planting of crops for domestic use. Crops planted here include sweet potatoes, rain rice, bananas, and cassava. Foodstuffs make up about 32% of the country’s total imports.

The ylang-ylang essence produced in the country is mostly used in the manufacturing of soaps and perfumes, and Comoros is its main producer. The country, after Madagascar, is the globe’s second largest producer of vanilla. Cloves are also a major cash crop of Comoros. The production of these three commodities varies a lot mostly as a result of the changes in the international demand and natural disasters, for instance, cyclones. This causes profits and government receipts to skyrocket and plummet. This wreaks havoc on the government efforts to plan expenditures and predict revenues. Most of the country’s vanilla is grown on Njazidja, and ylang-ylang is grown mostly in Nzwani.

It is important to note that food-crop farmers have led to erosion and deforestation of the highlands’ thin weak soil. This situation has received a number of responses from aid providers who have invested huge amounts of agricultural assistance to soil restoration, reforestation, and environmentally sensitive methods of cultivation.

Besides agriculture, the locals also participate in the livestock sector. The sector, is, however, very small. For example in 1990, there were only some 120,000 goats, 47,000 cows, 13,000 sheep, and 4,000 asses. The locals to date still import most of the domestically consumed meat. This sector has, however, not obtained the expected results because of poor management, health problems, and unproductive breeds.

Fishing sector in Comoros
This sector occupies a major place in the country’s economy. Fish is one of the main sources of animal proteins for the locals, and a fifth of the total population is dependent on the utilization of fishery resources for income. Major players in this sector are industrial, semi-industrial, and artisanal fleets who all exploit the waters of Comoros and tuna fish accounts for 80% of all catches.

Boat dock in Comoros, SourceTowards the end of the 1980s, Comoros has made a lot of progress in developing fisheries as a source of export earnings. In 1988, the government signed a 3-year agreement with the EC which allowed forty Spanish and French vessels to fish in Comorian waters, specifically for tuna. In return, Comoros was to get ECU 300,000, and ECU 50,000 was to be invested in fisheries research. Besides this cost, operators of fishing vessels were also required to pay ECU 20 per every ton of tuna caught. Japan has also offered assistance  to the country’s fishing industry and fisheries development is currently overseen by a state department known as the Development Company for Small-Scale Fisheries of the Comoros (Société de Développement de la Pêche Artisanale des Comores).

Forestry in Comoros
This is another sector that contributes to the country’s economy. As of the year 2000, forested regions amounted to roughly 8,000 hectares. Many tropical hardwoods and fruit trees are found in Comoros. Some timber is manufactured mostly on Grande Comore Island, which has close to half of the country’s remaining forest.

Industry in Comoros
Industrial activities contribute a very small portion to the economy. The main industries are the ones involved in the processing of cash crops for export.  Some of these industries distil ylang-ylang into perfume essence and prepare vanilla. Most of these activities were at one time controlled by French companies. These companies closed down plantations that were not bringing in any profits, and while they did that, local farmers established numerous small, but not efficient distilleries.

Comorians also make handicrafts for export. There are other small industries focused on internal markets. Such industries include productions of yogurt, plastics, shoes, handicrafts (for instance jewelry swapped as part of the grand marriage), carpentry, printing, and sawmills.

There are, however, a number of factors that restrict the growth of the industrial sector. Some of these factors are a scarcity of skilled labor and raw materials, the geographically isolated position of the islands and their distance from each other, transportation, and the high cost of electricity (energy is produced mostly by wood products, imported petroleum, and hydropower)

Tourism sector in Comoros
Ewa Air airplane at Comoros airport, SourceThis sector benefits a lot from the country’s extremely rich and diverse landscape. Its development is, however, restricted by a number of factors such as the lack of a skilled tourism workforce, the lack of any strategic documentation to govern the sector, the limited and expensive plane access, the unproductive management of cultural and natural resources, and the limited capability of tourism training institutions.

Infrastructure in Comoros
Comoros does not have the infrastructure needed for development. This is with regards to roads, airports, bridges, ports, water supply and sanitation systems, energy production and distribution, telecommunication networks and so on. Social infrastructure such as education and health facilities is also very low. The functionality of the infrastructure is also very low thus not being able to sustain the development of the private sector.

Most villages are not connected to the main road system. Some are, however, connected by tracks only usable by four-wheel drive vehicles. The ports are rudimentary and do not meet the minimum needs in terms of volume management and safety standards. A deepwater facility was, however, constructed on Anjouan but it is only small vessels that can approach the quays in Moroni on Grande Comore. Long-distance ships are forced to lie offshore and their uploading done by smaller boats and this procedure is quite dangerous during the cyclone season, and as a result, most ships are normally reluctant to call at the island. Freight is normally first sent to Réunion or Mombasa and transshipped from there.

The Private Sector in Comoros
This sector is very weak and uncompetitive despite it being the main contributor to the development of productive sectors. The sector does not have the capability to meet the demands of enhancing sector productivity. The main issues in this sector include low competitiveness of the local private organizations and weak growth. For the sector to work and be productive, the companies need better technical skills, improved management, favorable policies, and an institutional environment that makes it easy for the companies to operate.

External Trade
France is the main trading partner of Comoros and it finances and supports a number of small projects in the country. The United States of America also gets a growing percentage of the country’s exports. The US, however, only supplies a very small fraction of its imports.

The Comoros is very reliant on foreign aid and this has affected the country negatively. Because of this dependency, the country experiences recurrent trade deficits which are normally accompanied by chronic deficits in the budget.