Comoros officially referred to as the Union of the Comoros is an independent archipelago island country situated at the northern end of the Mozambique Channel off Africa’s eastern coast between northwestern Madagascar and northeastern Mozambique. Countries near the country are Seychelles to the northeast and Tanzania to the northwest. Moroni is the official capital city of Comoros and it is on Grande Comore. The main islands in Comoros are Anjouan, Grande Comore, Moheli, and Mayotte, which is still administered by France. Comorian, French, and Arabic are the official languages in Comoros, and Islam is the main religion.

The population of Comoros is made up of Africans, Arabs, Indonesians, Indians and Persians, and a small number of Europeans who inhabited the islands between the 8th and the 19th centuries. Influence from the Persians and Arabs is quite evident in the country especially, in the Muslim majority. As of July 2016, the countries total population was 794,678. The main ethnic groups across the islands are Sakalava, Antalote, Oimatsaha, Makoa, and Cafre.

Religious beliefs in Comoros
Ancient mosque, Moroni, Comoros, SourceIslam, specifically Sunni Islam, is the main religion in the country. There are, however, other religious beliefs practiced in the country. Some of these will be discussed in brief below.

Sunni Islam in Comoros
About 98% of the country’s total population adhere to Sunni Islam. It is believed that Islam was brought to the Union of Comoros in the 7th century by an Arab known as Mohamed Athoumani. Arab traders and Shirazi Princes banished from Persia also helped spread Islam in the country. The governing families soon after adopted the faith and helped in the construction of mosques, which are quite numerous in the Union of Comoros.

Islam is recognized as the official religion by the constitution of Comoros, and all public dogmas have to observe the values of Islam. Islam and its organizations have helped in the integration of the Comorian society and in providing recognition in a world that goes past the islands’ shores. Most of the followers of Islam are Persian or Arab-Swahili. There are also a few others of Indian descent.

All Islam followers strictly follow all the religious tenets. They also observe all the Muslim holidays such as Ramadhan, Mawlid, Id al-Adha, Ashura, Laylat al-Mi'raj, and Muharram among others. The majority of the Muslim women put on a printed cloth worn around the body. This cloth is known as shiromani. Marabouts, fundi, or mwalimus are also consulted for protection from jinn and healing. Jinn is usually activated by the mwalimus to determine favorable days for having a feast, make amulets that have Quranic ayat, determine a successful marriage, and carry out healing rituals.

A number of Islamic holy days such as Eid al-Fitr, the Birth of the prophet Muhammad, and the Islamic New Year are national holidays in Comoros.

All children are expected to go to Quranic schools for two or three years. Here, they are educated on the basics of Islam and the Arabic language.

Shia Islam in Comoros
Besides Sunni Islam, Shia Islam is also followed by a small population of Comorians. The relationship between these two branches of Islam is not hostile. There is, however, some bit of tension. The spread of Shia dogma is restricted in the country and followers of this Islamic faith are forced to exercise their faith in small assemblies.

Christianity in Comoros
Islam is the official religion of ComorosA very small population of Comorians are Christians and most of them practice Catholicism. Roman Catholics in the country are roughly 6,000 and make up about 0.8% of the population. The Roman Catholic Church in Mutsamudu and the one in Moroni, on Ngazidja, are the only Roman Catholic churches in Comoros. Besides Roman Catholicism, there are a few others who practice Protestantism. These are about 1,678 people and they make up roughly 0.25% of the population.

Christians in the country are not allowed to practice their faith in public. Christians are also not allowed to build churches or to distribute religious materials, for instance, the Bible. They are also subjected to societal disadvantage and denial of many civil rights. When a person defects from Islam to Christianity, the government usually persecutes him or her. The societal pressure from the Muslims in the country has made it difficult for Christians to exercise their faith. The churches in the country are monitored a lot to curtail any effort to convert to the Christian faith. Christian religious groups also do not have the duty to register.

Hinduismin in Comoros
This religious faith is practices by a small community of Indians in the country. Indian emigrants introduced the religion. Hinduism in the Union of Comoros and in Mayotte plays a small role in the cultures of the islands’, which are mostly founded on Islamic local customs and dogmas. All the same, Indian Hindus have made a contribution to the country’s economy. The majority of them work as jewelers.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Religious freedom in Comoros
After the military coup in 1999, the country’s May 2000 constitution did not provide for freedom of religion. The December 2001 constitution of the Union of Comoros provides for the freedom of religion. The government, however, continues to restrict the practice of this right. In 2009, an amendment was made to the constitution and it stated that Islam is the country’s official religion. The constitution also says that Islam is the “permanent inspiration of the principles and rules that govern the Union.”

It is mandatory for all children to learn Islamic scriptures in public school. This rule applies to all children even the non-Muslims. The minorities can, however, govern their learning institutions without using the Islamic scripture.

Religious factions or specific religions have not been banned by the Government. Religious groups are allowed to build places of worship, meet for peaceful religious functions, and even train their clerics to serve the followers. What is important to note is that evangelizing for any other religion besides Islam is illegal and emigrants caught evangelizing for other religions besides Islam are deported as per the outlines of the country’s laws.