The cultural heritage of China is one of the world’s oldest and most intricate with a history of more than 5,000 years.  Its huge geographical area contributes to the varying customs and traditions between provinces, cities and towns. 

Arts Porcelain pottery is considered as one earliest forms of art.  Chinese painting was a highly valued art in almost all court circles about a wide array of Shan shui with specific styles.  When paper was invented, paper cutting grew to be a new type of art. 

Architecture Two notable features in Chinese architecture are width and symmetry.  The Forbidden City is the best example of such elements.  Feng shui still plays a significant role in every structural development up to date. 

Leisure  The most widespread past-time game among Chinese is Mah Jong.  Other favorite games include Pai Gow, Pai gow poker, Go proverb, Xiangqi and bone domino games. 

Literature  The Five Cardinal Points is the basis for roughly every major study such as poetry, calendar, astrology, astronomy, and many others.  Several of the most essential early texts consist of the I Ching and Shujing within the Four Books and Five Classics.  Hu Shin and Lu Hun are believed to be the pioneers in modern literature. 

Music As early as 1122 B.C., there have been evidences of strong musical traditions in China.  During the Tang Dynasty, the first major well-documented blossoming of Chinese music was for the qin.  Several of the oldest music ever written dates back during the time of Confucius. 

Mythology and Spirituality Many deities have been part of the Chinese culture for thousand of years, the best known are Guan Yin, Jade Emperor and Budai.  innumerable manners of divination, folklores, practices such as fortune telling have been handed down from generations.

Values Confucianism and Taoism have great influences on many Chinese social values and traditions.  The subjects of Reincarnation and other rebirth theories serve as a reminder of the association involving earth-life and life after death.

