Burkina Faso is a landlocked nation located in West Africa. The country is bordered by six other countries: Niger to the east; Mali to the north; Togo and Ghana to the south; Benin to the southeast; and Ivory Coast to the southwest. The country’s capital city is Ouagadougou and it has a total population of roughly 17.3 million people. The country was formerly referred to as the Republic of Upper Volta but was later renamed Burkina Faso on August 4, 1984, by Thomas Sankara who was the president then. The name Burkina Faso means the “land of the honest people” and most of its population originates from a long line of warriors who at one time ruled over the powerful kingdoms in the territory for more than eight centuries.

The culture in Burkina Faso
Children in Burkina Faso, SourceBurkina Faso is a very ethnically diverse country. It in fact still has nomadic communities that travel in the northern territories. Approximately 40% of the total population is of Mossi descent, followed by the Bobo people who reside in the southwestern region. Other groups include Senufo, Mande, Lobi, Gurunsi, and the Fulani people who are semi-nomadic. Most of the people work as farmers, but others are also skilled metalworkers and artisans.

Culture is quite visible in all facets of life in the country. Art is also very close to the hearts of the locals. The country also has a huge handicrafts society with artisan centers in Ouagadougou and Gorom Gorom. The food in the country is similar and is influenced a lot by West African foods. The locals are, however, very creative in their use of staple foods such as potatoes, beans, millet, okra, peanuts, sorghum, yams, and maize. Another important aspect of Burkina Faso’s culture is dancing which is often used to ask for blessings and to demonstrate praise to the animal spirits. Most of the population is Muslim. About 40% adhere to animist beliefs and another 10% practice Christianity. Due to the country’s adherence to Muslim, the women are expected to dress appropriately; they avoid skimpy outfits and short skirts both in the rural and urban regions.

Some of the aspects of Burkina Faso’s culture such as religion, food, marriage, inheritance and so on will be discussed in brief below.

Religion in Burkina Faso
Approximately 45% of the country’s population adheres to traditional beliefs. Another 43% practices Islam especially in regions occupied by the Fulbe, Dyula, Mossi and Marka people. A small population practices Christianity (Catholicism and Protestantism) especially in the western and southern region, and among the urban elite.

Both Christianity and Islam have religious leaders. There is a standard clergy for the Christians and Imams, who conduct the Friday prayers, for the Muslims. There are numerous religious functions and offices for the traditional religions but they do not have any full-time religious practitioners. Every ethnic group has its own practitioners and the most significant ones can be referred to as rainmakers, earth priests, healers, or fortunetellers. Traditional religions are flexible, non-proselytizing, and tolerant. Certain religious specialists and cults have also gained popularity across the country because of the people’s belief that they offer useful help for specific problems. Magic and witchcraft are believed to be powerful antisocial forces but they are an important part of day-to-day life and they ensure that cultural norms are followed.

Cour Royale à Tiébélé, Burkina Faso, SourceSacrificing livestock, guinea fowls, or chicken is an important ritual in the traditional religions. These animals are offered to an extensive assortment of spiritual forces represented by noticeable natural features such as trees, termite hills, crossroads, caves, hills, ponds, rivers, and rocks, or by shrines.

Christians and Muslims also have their own places of worship. There is a small number of Catholic believers who form a very strong cult of Saint Maria. This group has erected numerous sanctuaries for worship throughout the country where they go to pray. Muslims, on the other hand, honor a few of the old mosques from the early years when the Islam faith was spread. Some of these mosques include the ones in Ouahabou and Bobo-Dioulasso.

With regards to death and the afterlife, the locals do not consider any death as natural, especially the death of a young person, or an accident. Necromancers or fortunetellers are consulted to determine if the deceased was a victim of witchcraft or if he or she had disobeyed some cultural beliefs. For the Muslims, the dead are buried within 24 hours and no ceremony takes place. Traditional believers, on the other hand, celebrate long and perform funeral rituals to lift the dead to the realm of the ancestors.

Marriage in Burkina Faso
In the previous years, arranged marriages were the norm but this has become rare nowadays, more so in the urban settings. In a customary marriage, a husband is expected to pay a bride price to the wife’s family. The amount paid is different from one ethnic group to the other with regards to substantial and symbolic contributions and it may take a long time to acquire. The disparities in the bride price normally deter interethnic marriages, but they are still practiced in some neighboring communities. After marriage, women are expected to join their husbands. This forms a coalition between the two families.

People can divorce and when that happens, the children are expected to stay with the father’s family, and when the woman remarries, bride price is given to the previous husband’s family. When a husband passes on, the widow is married off to one of the brothers of her deceased husband.

Inheritance in Burkina Faso
Mask ceremony, Bobo-Dioulasso, Houet, Burkina Faso, SourceWhen a man dies, his brothers and widow decide the inheritance. If the deceased had sons who are already mature, the property goes to them and they are obligated to take care of their mother. As per the modern family law, children born out of wedlock are also expected to inherit from the father. Children normally belong to the father’s line, but illegitimate ones belong to their maternal uncles.

Kin groups in Burkina Faso
The lineage or clan plays a very huge role in both urban and rural settings. The clans are normally cohesion groups with common taboos, customs, and name, and they are based on the notion of common ancestry. The most common form is the patri-clan. Under this type of clan, belonging is determined via the male lineage. A lineage or a clan can be made up of thousands of people. The clan can be scattered and each settlement made up of people from different clans. Before the colonial times, these clans were important since their helped in warfare and economic matters, but now they are meant to serve as pressure groups for political office and as common support networks for people living in the city.

Food in Burkina Faso
Tô is Burkina Faso’s staple food. This is a type of paste that is prepared with corn flour or millet and is normally accompanied by a sauce and is eaten while lukewarm. The common sauces are made with sorrel and/or baobab leaves and flavors that vary from one region to the other. Groundnut paste or Shea butter is also added once in a while. Yams are normally grown in the southern region, while those in the north incorporate milk in their diet.

There are a number of drinks that accompany the meals. These include the two national brands of beer namely Brakina and Sobbra. Most locals find these expensive so they drink the traditionally brewed beer referred to as dolo which is served in a calabash after being prepared for more than three days in big jars. The dolo is usually prepared by rural women and this is a source of income for them. The taste and strength of the millet beer varies from region to region. Another local drink is a palm wine known as Bangui and it is mostly prepared in the Banfora region. Other drinks include juice prepared from bissap leaves, ginger or the tamarind fruit. Tea plays a very significant role in the west and north regions.

Meat is not common in day-to-day meals. It is, however, consumed during ritual and ceremonial functions such as funerals, celebrating the birth of a child, and weddings. All the communities commemorate local fetes where special foods are prepared and local beer consumed.

Etiquette in Burkina Faso
Politeness and hospitality are very important to the people of Burkina Faso. Greetings are a detailed procedure which involves shaking of the hands. Conversations are not conducted directly, and general issues are usually conversed first so as to make everyone comfortable and at ease. Women are not allowed to put on low-cut dresses and short skirts. They are also not allowed to smoke in public. It is a common rule that all elders, even if older by a few years, should be treated with a lot of respect by the young ones. Uniformed individuals and officials should also be approached with respect, and no photograph of them, as well as official or government buildings should be taken. Everybody is expected to stand still during the lowering of the national flag.
