Burkina Faso is a landlocked country situated in West Africa. It is surrounded by six nations namely Niger to the east, Mali to the north, Ghana and Togo to the south, Benin to the Southeast and Ivory Coast to the southwest. The country’s capital city is Ouagadougou. In 2014, Burkina Faso’s total population was estimated to be over 17.3 million. The country is a francophone nation and French is the formal language of business and government. The country was previously known as the Republic of Upper Volta and was renamed “Burkina Faso” by the then-President Thomas Sankara on 4 August 1984.

Religious beliefs in Burkina Faso
Statistics on religious beliefs in Burkina Faso are not that accurate since Christianity and Islam are usually exercised alongside local religious beliefs. The 2006 census report conducted by the government indicated that about 60.5% of the country’s population practiced Islam and that most of them adhered to the Sunni branch, and a few others to Shia Islam. There are also a few others who are Ahmadiyya Muslims. A huge number of Sunni Muslims adhere to the Tijaniyah Sufi order. The report also estimated that 23.2% of the citizens were Christians. Of these, 19% were Roman Catholics and 4.2% practiced Protestantism. Another 11.3% practice traditional indigenous beliefs, and the remaining 1% have other regions or none at all.

All these religious beliefs thrive well in Burkina Faso. This is mainly because of the nation’s constitution, which promotes all types of religions. The constitution also shows respect to every citizen’s mode of worship, provided it does not impede the rest of the citizens. With this in mind,   some of these religious beliefs will be discussed in brief below.

Islam in Burkina Faso
Navrongo Cathedral, SourceIn the 11th century, Burkina Faso, then referred to as Upper Volta, was inhabited by Mossi Kingdoms. These kingdoms safeguarded their traditional and religious beliefs from outside forces, mostly the Muslims from the northwest. This, however, changed in the 15th century when the region established trading centers, for instance, the Akan gold field which allowed the traders to trade in salt, nuts, and gold. These developments and changes were appealing to the Muslim traders who went ahead to establish their settlements and even intermarried between them and the local women thus leading to a change of the indigenous people. It was perceived that the Muslims were a section of the Mossi Kingdom. Islam was, therefore, spread in the whole Upper Volta region, Guinea, and Ivory Coast and was promoted via the building of mosques, the media, and Muslim celebrations.

Most of the Muslims in the country are Malikite Sunni. Maliki madhhab is among the four main schools of Fiqh or religious law in Sunni Islam. This school was established in the 8th century by Malik ibn Anas. This school relies mostly on hadiths and the Quran as main sources of law. Maliki Fiqh, unlike other Fiqhs perceives the agreement of the people of Medina to be a legit source of Islamic law.

Most of the Sunni Muslims also follow the Tijaniyah Suffi order. This order attaches a lot of importance to education and culture. It also emphasizes on the distinct bond of the murīd or the disciple. For one to be considered a member of this order, he must obtain a series of holy phrases to be recited twice every day, or the Tijānī wird from the order’s representative referred to as mugaddam. The wird is usually a repetition ofLā 'ilāha 'illa Llāh" ("There is no God but Allah"), "Astaghfiru Llāh" ("I ask God for forgiveness"), and a prayer for Muḥammad known as the Ṣalātu l-Fātiḥ (Prayer of the Opener).The duties of the order are explained to the initiate by the mugaddam. Some of these duties include respecting and honoring one’s parents, preserving the key dogmas of Islam including Islam’s five pillars, and not following another Suffi order alongside Tijaniya. Initiates also take part in the Waẓīfah.This is similar to the Wird and is recited as a group in a mosque. They also take part in Zawiyah once every day, as well as the Hadarat al- Jumʿah, Hailalat al- Jumʿah, a prayer recited by members on Friday afternoon before sunset.

The disciples also have meetings regularly, mostly on Thursday evenings, or before or after Ḥaḍarat al-Jumʿah and Waẓīfa to take part in dhikr Allāh, or the commemoration of God. In such meetings, the phrase "Lā 'ilāha 'illa Llāh" or simply "Allāh" is repeated by the group. In these meetings, poems praising Muhammad, God, or a religious leader can be interlarded with the dhikr.

A small number of Muslims in the country adhere to Shia Islam.

Roman Catholic Christianity in Burkina Faso
Mosque in Bobo-Dioulasso, SourceAs mentioned earlier, Catholicism is practiced by 19% of the population. This religious belief was established in the country in 1896 when the French colonialists arrived in Burkina Faso. The faith was established firmly between 1900 and 1901 by missionaries and soon after Catholic missions were developed.

Protestant Christianity in Burkina Faso
This is the minority religion in the country and is practiced by about 4.2% of the country’s population. The Protestants are usually against the teachings conducted by the Roman Catholic Church and are mostly located in Bobo-Dioulasso as well as Ouagadougou.

Traditional African Religions and Folk Beliefs in Burkina Faso
These African beliefs are mainly the different indigenous beliefs and religions, for instance, traditional medicine, worshiping of the dead, belief in a supreme creator and in spirits among others. The arrival of the colonialists and Muslims in Burkina Faso led to the combination of either Islam or Christianity beside these beliefs. Despite the fact that there is a wide acceptance and adherence to these beliefs, adherents of traditional African Religions and beliefs only make up 11.3% of the country’s population.

Agnosticism or Atheism in Burkina Faso
Atheism can simply be understood as the rejection of the existence of religious beliefs or deities. This practice often criticizes religion. The Atheists normally base their arguments on social, philosophical, and historical approaches of inadequate significant proof of the presence of a god. In Burkina Faso, Atheists make up 1% of the country’s population and are mostly considered non-existent.
