Ivory Coast also referred to as Côte d'Ivoire, and officially known as the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire is an independent nation situated in West Africa. The country’s political capital city is Yamoussoukro, while its largest and economic capital city is the port city of Abidjan. Ivory Coast is bordered by Liberia and Guinea to the west, Ghana to the east, and Mali and Burkina Faso to the north. The Atlantic Ocean (The Gulf of Guinea) is situated south of the country.

Culture of Ivory Coast
The country’s culture is illustrated by the numerous ethnic groups, festivals, events, art, and music. Some of these cultural aspects will be discussed in brief below.

Religion of Ivory Coast
A mother and child walking home, SourceRoughly 12% of the country’s population practices the Christian faith. Another 25% practices Islam, while 63% adhere to traditional beliefs. Most of the population practices traditional religions which involve the worshipping of ancestors. The locals believe that the dead transform into spirits and that they are in contact at all times with the living. The living carry out a number of rituals so as seek for the protection and blessings of the dead. Magic is very common in Ivory Coast, and good magic is used to keep away evil spirits.

There are juju priests or medicine men, who give out charms and advice on how to stay away from danger and tell fortunes. These medicine men also bless grisgris, necklaces containing charms that chase away specific evils.

Food of Ivory Coast
In Ivory Coast, tubers such as cassava and yams and grains such as rice, maize (corn), and millet make up the majority of meals. These staple foods are accompanied by legumes such as peanuts, beans, or peas, and smaller portions of spices, oils, vegetables, and proteins – especially meat or fish. The grains are prepared by the women who grind them in huge wooden bowls with long wooden pestles. Family meals are mostly prepared outside in metal or ceramic pots on stone hearths.

The foods are usually very spicy are one eats using his or her hands. Common dishes are made up of rice accompanied by a pepper-flavored peanut cause which is found mostly in northern savannah, and fried plantains and fish prepared in the coastal regions. Foutou, also spellt as futu is the national dish, and it is a thick heavy paste prepared from mashed yams or plantains and is eaten with stew made of meat or fish, or with a spicy sauce. Gari, dried, grated cassava is also a popular food in the country. Maquis is Ivory Coast’s most common culinary treat and it is made up of fish and chicken breast in tomatoes and onions. The locals also have a very tasty street-vended food referred to as aloko. This is simply ripe banana in palm oil and it spiced with chili and steamed onions and can be eaten with grilled fish or alone. Home-brewed beer and palm wine are the favorite drinks among the locals.

Food also plays a significant role in the religious and ceremonial festivities of the local people. Drinking and feasting are normally used in religious ceremonies, coming-of-age ceremonies, and memorial/funeral services. The most important festival among some of the local communities, for instance, the Akan people, is the yam festival, which is a time of thanksgiving for good harvest and a chance to remember the unearthing of the yam. The most common festival involving food is the Festival of Masks and it takes place annually. Food is also a common factor in Muslim Holidays such as the holy month of Ramadan and Eid al-Fitr. Fetish priests also use food to create amulets or magic portions. The locals also believe that the future can be comprehended by throwing some grains of rice into a box. The locals also offer ancestral spirits food and drink before consulting them.

Fashion of Ivory Coast
Just like any other developing country, the locals wear both traditional and western clothes. However, most women still put on the traditional brightly colored dresses referred to as pagnes with matching head scarves. These dresses are also worn with long pieces of cloth that the women tie around themselves as skirts. Men, on the other hand, put on shorts or wrap short pieces of cloth around their bodies. For ceremonial occasions, men put on long beautiful robes.

Events and festivals of Ivory Coast
Basilique Notre Dame de la Paix in Yamusukro, Lacs, SourceThe Festival of Masks (Fêtes des Masques) is held every December in the Man region. This is one of Ivory Coast’s best-known and biggest festivals. Competitions between villages are organized so as to identify the best dancers, and to pay respect to the forest spirits personified in the masks. Bouaké is another important event. This is a week-long carnival and is normally held every March. Another festival is the Fête du Dipri which is carried out in Gomon, near Abidjan every April. The festival begins close to midnight when naked women and children sneak out of their huts and conduct nocturnal rites so as to cleanse the village of any evil spells. Before the sun rises, the village chief comes out, the drums pound, and all the villagers go into trances and this frenzy lasts until late afternoon the following day. There are religious festivals held in the country, for instance, Ramadan where people of the Islam faith fast from sunrise to sunset for a whole month, as per the pillars of Islam. This normally comes to an end with a feast referred to as Eid al-Fitr where people pray together, give presents, and visit friends.

Music of Ivory Coast
Music in the country is made up of music genres from numerous ethnic communities and is characterized by a sequence of melodies and rhythms that take place simultaneously, without one overshadowing the other. The local music is also characterized by the talking drums specifically among the Nzema community, the characteristic poly-rhythms found in Sub-Saharan Africa rhythm, and by the vocal polyphony particularly among the Baoulé. In Ivory Coast, music is used in numerous aspects of culture. The Dan community, for instance, celebrate weather, rice, birth, marriage, and death all with music.

Some of the musical instruments used in the country include cleavers, Akombe, Shekere (Youroo), Kpalogo, djembe, and the talking drum, and all are made from local instruments such as horns, animal skins, and gourds. The most common music genres from Ivory Coast are Coupé-Décalé, zouglou, and zoblazo.

Art of Ivory Coast
Masks are a common form of art in the country. The complexity and variety of the masks created by the locals cannot be compared to any. The masks serve numerous purposes but they are mostly used for representative purposes; they can represent caricatures of animals, the souls of the dead, and lesser deities.

The masks are believed to be very sacred and dangerous. As a result, it is only specific powerful persons and their families who are allowed to have them. Specially-trained people are the only ones allowed to put on the masks. The locals believe that it is dangerous for others to put on the masks because it is perceived that every mask has a life force or soul and that when an individual’s face comes into contact with the inside of the mask, he or she changes into the entity represented by the mask.

The Senoufo, the Dan (or Yacouba) and the Baoulé are known for their wooden carvings.

Marriage in Ivory Coast
Yassa dish prepared with chicken or fish.Marriages in the country focus mostly on the combining of two families and the development of a new household is very important to wedding rituals. The legal marriage age for boys is eighteen and that for girls is sixteen; these ages have been set by the country’s government. Polygamy is also an accepted way of life, especially among the indigenous ethnic groups.

The domestic unit of Ivory Coast
The extended family is the basic social unit for the family, be it in the rural or urban setting. Men are generally viewed as the head of the home and women, on the other hand, tend to childrearing and other domestic needs. Women, in Baoule village, reside with their husbands’ families, but in Senufo region, husbands and wives separately; the husbands live in rectangular houses and the wives in round ones. When girls get married and leave the home, the sons are normally tasked with the responsibility of taking care of the elders of that household.

Inheritance practices in Ivory Coast
All the inheritance practices in the traditional communities are dominated by men. The people of Senufo and Baoule belong to their mother’s family. This means that land and power are passed down via a mother’s family line to her sister’s sons. In Nyula and Bete, inheritance is passed down through the father’s line to the sons. In most traditional communities in the country, women don’t have the right to inherit land; they only use that of their families or husbands.

Gender roles in Ivory Coast
In the rural regions, men and women divide the labor. Men clear the land and harvest cash crops like coffee and cocoa. Women, on the other hand, perform household tasks and plant vegetables and other staples. Women also take care of their families, collect fuel and water, produce pottery and handicrafts to sell, and weave and spin. Prominent government and civic positions, as well as the role of tribal chiefs of villages, are held mostly by men. The men also dominate religious roles, from Muslim Imams to Catholic Priests to Shamans.