Ivory Coast is a West African country with beach resorts and rainforests. This square shaped country measures approximately 124,500 square miles which is a similar size to Germany. Ivory Coast borders the Gulf of Guinea to the south and five other African nations form borders around its other three sides. In 2017 Ivory Coast’s population grew to 20.3 million with life expectancy at 52 years for men and 55 years for women.

Ivory Coast’s official name is the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire. It is divided into 12 administrative districts and has 2 district-level autonomous cities. The districts are split into 31 regions which are then divided into 108 departments and finally the departments are divided into 510 sub-prefectures. In some cases, several villages are arranged into communes. The autonomous districts are not divided into regions; however, they still contain departments, sub-prefectures and communes.

Since 2011, governors have not been appointed for the 12 non-autonomous districts and because of this these districts have yet to function as governmental entities.

For over 30 years after its independence from France, Ivory Coast was recognised for its ethnic and religious harmony, along with its well-developed economy. It was upheld as a model of stability. However, an armed uprising in 2002 divided the nation in two. Since then, each time the country has gradually edged its way closer to a political resolution, the peace deals have been replaced with renewed bouts of violence.

Despite this unpredictability, Ivory Coast is still the world's biggest exporter of cocoa beans and its citizens enjoy a fairly high level of income in comparison to other countries in the region.

Ivory Coast’s political capital is the city of Yamoussoukro, whilst its economic capital is the port city of Abidjan. The country’s major language is French, which is taught in schools but there are an estimated 65 indigenous languages spoken across the country.

The National Assembly building
Political History of the Ivory Coast
In the 1840s, the French established a series of treaties with West African rulers that allowed them to build garrisoned posts along the Gulf of Guinea. These posts were set up by the French to serve as permanent trading centres. Ivory Coast officially became a French colony on March 10, 1893.
 

Until 1958, Paris appointed governors who administered the colony using a system of centralised administration that left little or no room for Ivorian participation in policy making. However, as a result of a referendum in 1958, Ivory Coast became an autonomous republic within the French Community and two years later on 11 July 1960 France agreed to Ivory Coast becoming fully independent.
Ivory Coast’s first President was Felix Houphouet-Boigny who held power until his death in 1993. Houphouet-Boigny was succeeded by his deputy, Henri Konan Bédié.

Coup D'état
Henri Konan Bédié ruled until 1999 when, during a military coup, he was overthrown by General Robert Guéï. This was the first coup d'état in Ivory Coast history and economic decline followed, which is why the military dictatorship, The Junta, promised to return the country to democratic rule in 2000. Guéï held elections in the same year but when Laurent Gbagbo won, he refused to accept his defeat. After street protests, he was forced him to step down and Gbagbo became president on October 26, 2000.
 

First Civil War
On September 19, 2002 a rebellion in the North and the West occurred and the country was divided in three parts. Mass murders occurred across the country and hundreds of Ivorians were killed. Peacekeeping troops were sent by France to Ivory Coast and a reconciliation process under international patronage began in 2003. In 2004 the United Nations established an Ivory Coast Operation and after deadly clashes during a crackdown on an opposition rally against President Gbagbo in Abidjan, the first contingent of the UN peacekeeping force was deployed.
 

In November 2004, the Ivorian air force attacked rebels and after nine French soldiers were killed in an air strike, France entered the conflict. Violent anti-French protests followed and the UN imposed an arms embargo.

After talks in South Africa in 2005, the rebels and the government declare an "immediate and final end" to hostilities. Elections were planned for October 2005 but those plans were shelved when President Gbagbo invoked a law which he claimed allowed him to stay in power. The UN extended his mandate for a further year.

Power-sharing deal
In March 2007 Government and New Forces rebels signed a power-sharing peace deal, the agreement was mediated by Burkina Faso. Under the deal, New Forces leader Guillaume Soro was named as prime minister. In April President Gbagbo declares "the war is over" and the two sides moved to demolish the military buffer zone. However, within days aid workers reported an increase in violence.
 

Alassane Ouattara,president of Ivory Coast (2019), Source
Second Civil War
In 2010, five years after Gbagbo's term of office was supposed to have expired, elections were finally held.  After the northern candidate, Alassane Ouattara, was declared the winner by the country's Independent Electoral Commission, the President of the Constitutional Council (an ally of Gbagbo) announced the results were invalid and Gbagbo was the winner. Both Gbagbo and Ouattara claimed the win and took the presidential oath of office.
 

The international community affirmed their support for Ouattara and appealed for Gbagbo to step down. However, negotiations to resolve the dispute failed. Violence escalated, hundreds of people were killed and at least a million people fled.

International organisations reported many instances of human rights violations by both sides and military action was taken by both UN and French forces. In April 2011
Ouattara's forces captured Gbagbo and Ouattara was inaugurated as president the following month. Gbagbo was handed over to the International Criminal Court in The Hague to face charges of crimes against humanity.

In September 2011 the Truth, Reconciliation and Dialogue Commission was launched. This commission was aimed at establishing unity after post-election violence left around 3,000 people dead and 500,000 people displaced. In December, Parliamentary elections were held and President Ouattara secured a majority when followers of Gbagbo boycotted the vote.

The UN Security Council finally lifted the embargo on Ivory Coast's diamond trade in 2014.

Ivory Coast Government Since 2014
For the last decade the Ivory Coast President was elected for a five-year term by the people. The country’s National Assembly, which had 255 members, was elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies. Ivory Coast was a one-party dominant state with the Ivorian People's Front in power. Opposition parties were allowed but were broadly thought to have no real chance of gaining power.

In 2015, Ouattara won a second five-year term with nearly 84% of the vote, in an election described as credible by US observers.

On 18 December 2016 the latest round of Parliamentary elections took place. The new constitution, which in October, was approved in a referendum, reduced the term for the 255 members of the National Assembly from five to four years. The presidential coalition, the Rally of Houphouëtists for Democracy and Peace won over half the number of seats. In January 2017 when the National Assembly met for the new parliamentary term, Guillaume Soro, an RHDP deputy, was re-elected as President of the National Assembly. He received 230 votes from the 252 deputies present on the day.

Media within the country is heavily controlled, the government is in charge of the wide-reaching outlets, including TV and radio networks and the main daily newspaper. There are no privately-owned terrestrial TV stations in Ivory Coast and according to Reporters Without Borders the media are kept under close government scrutiny.

On the other hand, Ivory Coast does maintain diplomatic relations with other countries and international organisations around the world. It has signed United Nations treaties such as, the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1969 Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa. Ivory Coast is a member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, Economic Community of West African States, African Union, La Francophonie, Latin Union and South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone. Ivory Coast has joined with other Sub-Saharan nations to strengthen water and sanitation infrastructure, working with organisations such as UNICEF and Nestle.

2017 continued to see unrest for the country and the Government was faced with numerous mutinies by the army. In January President Ouattara sacked army, policy and gendarmes’ chiefs over a two-day army mutiny that took place in various cities. The mutiny only ended after the government paid bonuses and pledged to improve working conditions. However, between January and May further mutinies occurred when bonuses had not been paid. In December the Government announced a plan to pay hundreds of soldiers to resign from the army.