Cote d'Ivoire, also referred to as Ivory Coast is officially referred to as The Republic of Cote d'Ivoire and is situated in West Africa. The country’s political capital city is Yamoussoukro. Abidjan, on the other hand, is Ivory Coast’s largest city and the economic capital city. Liberia and Guinea border Ivory Coast to the West, Ghana to the east, and Mali and Burkina Faso to the north. The Atlantic Ocean, also known as the Gulf of Guinea is situated south of the country.

Religious beliefs in Cote d'Ivoire

Basilica of Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro, Lacs, Ivory Coast, SourceReligion in this country is quite diverse and there is no specific religion that dominates over the others. It has been estimated that 46.7% of the population practice Christianity. Of these, 19.4% are Catholic, 19.3% Evangelical, 2.5% Methodist, and other Christian denominations make up the remaining 4.5%. 40.2% of the country’s population is Muslim, and another 12.8% adhere to animism or have no religion. Other religions are adhered to by 1.4% of the population.

Christianity is exercised in different forms in the whole country, but mostly in the southern region. The different forms of Christianity are as a result of the diverse spiritual and social challenges that bring about diverse responses. Christian missionaries started arriving in the country in the 17th century. It was, however, in the 19th century when they were able to win over numerous followers. The Christian faith was more appealing to learned Africans and to those who wanted progression via European contact. Islam has been exercised in the northern region for close to seven centuries. All Christian holidays and Muslim celebrations have official recognition.

All religious societies live with each other peacefully. No specific religion has been adopted by the majority of the locals. In most cases, conversions are a personal matter, and most families are made up of Christians and Muslims and they all live together. Religious tolerance is a section of the government’s policy. The President normally makes contributions to the construction of churches and mosques. He also encourages both Christians and Muslims to help in projects being pursued by other religious communities. Religious leaders have also gotten a lot of goodwill via the services they provide their communities with, especially in education and health, and by their general contribution to social unity.

The Constitution of Ivory Coast calls for a secular state. This is, however, not interpreted as a strict division of state and church. Government officials normally go to religious functions as representatives of the nation. A number of mission schools also receive aid from the government. Missionaries are normally welcomed in all regions of the country. Their teachings, however, rarely replace ancient practices and spiritual beliefs that shape the foundation of the nation’s cultural harmony.

With this in mind, some of the religious beliefs in the country will be discussed in brief below.

Roman Catholicism in Cote d'Ivoire
This religion is practiced by about 19.4% of the population. Cote d'Ivoire is home to the Yamoussoukro Basilica. This is a copy of the Saint Peter’s Basilica located in Rome. The Yamoussoukro Basilica in the largest worldwide, and was constructed by former President Felix Houphouet-Biogny. In a number of villages across the country, patron saints have been appointed and feted on religious and secular holidays. The Roman Catholic Church has historically had some influence in the nation’s political affairs. The dominance of Roman Catholicism is, however, facing a threat from the growth of the Muslim population and other religious beliefs.

Protestantism and other forms of non-Catholic Christianity in Cote d'Ivoire
26.3% of the country’s population adhere to Protestantism or other non-Catholic Christian beliefs. Protestantism gained some footing in the country in 1924 when British Methodists arrived. In 1914, the Harris Church was established by a Liberian Preacher called Wade Harris. This religion was known as Harrism and it deplored wealth and in its place advocated for an austere life. This religion is still very popular among the locals. Other churches have also incorporated their religions with traditional beliefs. Other Protestant Churches in the country include Baptists, the Assemblies of God, Latter-day Saints, and Mission Biblique.

Islam in Cote d'Ivoire
Methodist Church, Bonoua, Sud-Comoé, Ivory Coast, SourceThis religion is practiced by 40.2% of the population. Islam was introduced in Ivory Coast by Jula traders who had connections with the Malinke of the Mali Empire. They helped developed Islamic centers in the country’s northern region. Currently, Islam is practiced more in the northern region. This is mostly because of the numerous Muslim emigrants from bordering nations, for instance, Burkina Faso. The majority of the Muslims in Ivory Coast are Sunni and follow the Maliki school of thought. A few others adhere to Sufi Islam, and this is combined with traditional indigenous practices. Others adhere to the Ahmadiyya.

Islam in the country is characterized by trust in the marabout who is viewed as a miracle worker. He also has both magic and moral power.

Animism, Folk Beliefs, and Traditional African Religions in Cote d'Ivoire
8% of the country’s population adhere to Animism, traditional religions, and folk beliefs. Traditional beliefs are different from one ethnic group to another, but they are all hinged on ancestral spirits, a supreme being, and the ability to communicate to ancestral spirits via religious leaders. Worshipping of ancestors is quite common and shrines are normally constructed and dedicated to the spirits. Followers of these practices believe that there are good and evil spirits and rituals are often carried out to conjure the resolve of the good spirits. Animism, witchcraft, and fetishism are very common in the rural areas.

Syncretic religions in Cote d'Ivoire
Both Christianity and Islam have been incorporated to aboriginal religions in a number of ways. Besides these confined types of global religions, there are other intricate practices and belief systems that merge numerous elements of a number of religions. The most common forms of  syncretic religions are the numerous branches of Harrism, especially along the coast where disciples, preachers, and prophets merge Harrism, and present-day political counsel so as to tackle the challenges of day-do-day life.

These religions are popular in minority communities or among groups that consider themselves to be in objection of political dominance by their neighbors. The Agni people, for example, have remained predominantly Catholic, while the Baoulé have developed forms of syncretic religions and follow prophets who assure them of good fortune as a recompense for their loyalty. Other groups in the northeast region of the country have also developed a number of belief systems in an attempt to preserve their traditions.

Other religions in Cote d'Ivoire
Other religions practiced in the country include Buddhism, Sikhism, and Baha'i Faith. People practicing these religions make up 3.6% of the total population. Another 2% do not adhere to any religion.